feat: add view based access control documentation (#458)
vaadin/docs: articles/flow/integrations/spring/view-based-authorization.asciidoc

---
title: View Based Authorization
order: 25
layout: page
---

> = View Based Authorization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= View-Based Authorization
```

> Vaadin applications that are based on Spring Boot, can leverage from a view based authorization mechanism out of the box, which can be enabled by using a set of annotations and with minimum Spring Security configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vaadin applications that are based on Spring Boot can use a view-based authorization mechanism out of the box.
You can enable it by using a set of annotations and with minimum Spring Security configurations.
```

== Introduction

> At a glance, this mechanism is based on using `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, `@RolesAllowed`, and `@DenyAll` annotations on view classes to define the access control rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The view-based authorization mechanism uses the `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, `@RolesAllowed`, and `@DenyAll` annotations on view classes to define the access control rules.
```

> This approach is also based on Vaadin's Spring Boot and Spring Security Auto-Configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach is also based on Vaadin's Spring Boot and Spring Security autoconfiguration.
```

> If you are not using Spring Boot in your Vaadin Flow application, you may need extra configurations to enable this authorization mechanism. `??? the last sentence needs further discussions`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are not using Spring Boot in your Vaadin Flow application, you may need extra configurations to enable the authorization mechanism.
// TODO ??? the last sentence needs further discussions
```

> .Vaadin Fusion Tip:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Use of the annotations in Vaadin Fusion
```

[TIP]
The same set of annotations are used to define the security access control rules on the endpoints of a <<{articles}/fusion/overview#,Vaadin Fusion>> application.
You can find out more about Security in a Vaadin Fusion application <<{articles}/fusion/security/configuring#,here>>.

> .Where to Find the Source Codes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Source for the complete example code
```

[TIP]
A complete example project containing the source codes of this documentation is available https://github.com/vaadin-learning-center/crm-tutorial/tree/latest[here].

== Adding View Based Access Control

> As mention in the <<Introduction,Introduction>>, this mechanism is based on Spring Security and Vaadin's Spring Boot Auto-Configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the <<introduction,Introduction>>, the mechanism is based on Spring Security and Vaadin's Spring Boot autoconfiguration.
```

However, it is also possible to use it in Vaadin Spring applications that are not based on Spring Boot with some extra configurations.

== Introduction

Protecting restricted views in Spring based Vaadin Flow applications can happen through the following ways:

- By using Spring Security's URL pattern based HTTP security configurations
- By adding View-Based Access Control mechanism

As by navigating between routes of a Vaadin Flow application there would not be traditional page requests to the server, checking the authorized access to views using only Spring Security URL based filtering mechanism would be equal to only securing the first requested route, or simply no Security for the views at all, except for the first requested path.
This happens generally for any single page application that tries to secure its routes only using Spring Security.

.Do not rely on Spring Security's URL based authorization in Single Page Applications
[NOTE]
It is important to note that this View Based Access Control should be considered as the main mechanism of restricting access to the views.

> The traditional Spring Security's URL based `HttpSecurity` configurations should not be considered as the security mechanism for securing the views at all, except for the static resources as there is no way to load them other than URLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The traditional Spring Security's URL-based `HttpSecurity` configurations should not be considered as the security mechanism for securing the views at all, except for the static resources as there is no way to load them other than URLs.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The traditional Spring Security's URL-based [classname]#HttpSecurity# configurations should not be considered as the security mechanism for securing the views at all, except for the static resources as there is no way to load them other than URLs.
```

The view-based Access Control mechanism uses the `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, `@RolesAllowed`, and `@DenyAll` annotations on view classes to define the access control rules.

.Use of the annotations in Vaadin Fusion
[TIP]
Although, the same set of annotations are used to define the security access control rules on endpoints of a <<{articles}/fusion/overview#,Vaadin Fusion>> application, this document should not be considered as the way of securing client side views.
You can find out more about Security in a Vaadin Fusion application <<{articles}/fusion/security/configuring#,here>>.

The approach of the <<View Based Access Control in Spring Boot Based Applications,first part of this documentation>> is based on Vaadin's Spring Boot and Spring Security autoconfiguration.
If you are not using Spring Boot in your Vaadin Flow application, you may need extra configurations to enable this Access Control mechanism, that are addressed in <<View Based Access Control in Spring Based Applications>> (without Spring Boot).

== View Based Access Control in Spring Boot Based Applications

> As mentioned in the <<Introduction,introduction>>, the mechanism is based on Spring Security and Vaadin's Spring Boot autoconfiguration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the <<introduction,Introduction>>, the mechanism is based on Spring Security and Vaadin's Spring Boot autoconfiguration.
```

Author: I think the first part of <<[first],[second]>> should point to another title in this document (the same case, otherwise shows error), and the second one is the text shown in the text.

Reviewer: I think anchor references should be in lower case. AsciiDoc creates IDs automatically from the heading by making it lower case and replacing spaces with dashes, as in https://vaadin.com/docs/latest/guide/running/#running-with-maven . I'd recommend not using the automatic IDs though, but specify the ID manually with [[introduction]], so that changing the title doesn't invalidate the ID.

Well, in this case it's fine and maybe better to use "in the introduction". The normal recommendation is to refer to articles and sections by title, which is a name, such as: "as described in Running with Maven". In this case either is fine.

> To enable this mechanism in a Vaadin Flow Spring Boot application without any security, the followings should be added to the project (if not exist already):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the mechanism in a Vaadin Flow Spring Boot application without any security, the following should be added to the project (if not exist already):
```
